+++
date = "2024-08-22T21:40:00+01:00"
title = "Books Read: June 2024"
draft = false
+++

July and August have been *really* busy, not with _teaching_ (it's the summer
teaching break), but with research and research supervision, a little bit of
holiday travel, and various *life* things taking up my time and attention. I
have had time to read, but not so much time to write *paragraphs* about each
book. Instead of skipping the books-of-the-month post entirely, here's a
stripped back version with a link and a sentence for each book.

July was [Kierkegaard](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kierkegaard/) month.
I enjoyed reading through : _[Fear and
Trembling](https://uk.bookshop.org/p/books/fear-and-trembling-dialectical-lyric-by-johannes-de-silentio-soren-kierkegaard/14718?ean=9780140444490)_,
which I'd known *of* for many years, but never read through. He's a striking
prose stylist, as well as a thoughtful reader of the biblical Abraham and Isaac
story.  Alongside, I read [Jeffrey
Hanson](https://hfh.fas.harvard.edu/people/jeff-hanson)'s _[Kierkegaard and the
Life of
Faith](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Kierkegaard-Life-Faith-Aesthetic-Philosophy-ebook/dp/B01N1U9SNF/consequentlyorg)_,
which is not only a commentary and analysis of _Fear and Trembling_, but an
extensive treatment of Kierkegaard's _teleological suspension of the ethical_,
and a thoughtful and sympathetic treatment of Kierkegaard's account of the life
of faith. 

<!--more-->

The other non-fiction in July was [Walter
Wink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walter_Wink)'s _[Naming the
Powers](https://uk.bookshop.org/p/books/naming-the-powers-the-language-of-power-in-the-new-testament-walter-wink/4697673?ean=9780800617868)_—again,
a classic that had been looming in the background of a lot of the theology I’ve
read over the years; [Ivan Illich](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivan_Illich)’s
_[Tools for Conviviality](https://archive.org/details/illich-conviviality)_,
which reminded me of Weil’s _[The Need for
Roots](https://uk.bookshop.org/p/books/the-need-for-roots-prelude-to-a-declaration-of-duties-towards-mankind-simone-weil/956068)_,
in that it's a presecription for a radically reconfigured human polity, taking
seriously the premise that human flourishing involves life _together_; and, for
a complete change of pace,  _[Classical Mechanics: The Theoretical
Minimum](https://uk.bookshop.org/p/books/classical-mechanics-the-theoretical-minimum-george-hrabovsky/2946153?ean=9780141976228)_
from [Leonard Susskind](https://sitp.stanford.edu/people/leonard-susskind) and
[George Hrabovsky](https://www.madscitech.org/members/geh.htm)—I've not
seriously thought through any physics in a systematic way since high school
(and I think it wasn't systematic then, either), so getting a gentle
introduction to the basics of classical mechanics was fun.

The only _fiction_ for July was _[Orbital: A Novel]([Orbital a book by Samantha
Harvey.](https://uk.bookshop.org/p/books/orbital-awe-inspiring-max-porter-samantha-harvey/7609785?ean=9781529922936))_
[Samantha Harvey](https://www.samanthaharvey.co.uk), a gentle meditative story
that takes in the perspective of a team of astronauts on the International
Space Station. You get to imagine the astronauts experiencing [the overview
effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overview_effect), each in their own way,
during 16 orbits of the earth over a 24 hour period. Delightful.


